---
title: Insularity
layout: gold
image: https://data.fitzmuseum.cam.ac.uk/imagestore/ant/ant39/preview_GR_19_1917_20_281_29.jpg
---
In geographic terms, islands are merely pieces of land surrounded by water, but the perception of island life has never been neutral. Throughout history, islands have been treated as distinct places, unlike mainland and continental masses. But are islands inherently different from mainlands? Historically in the Mediterranean, some islands rose to the role of mini-continents due to their size and economic and political importance. Ancient Greeks, for example, considered Sicily a continent in its own right<sup>[1](#f1)</sup>. Likewise, the large Mediterranean islands of Crete, Cyprus, and Sardinia, were often given a special status due to their size, as they occupy an intermediate position between small island worlds, such as the Aegean islands system, and the surrounding landmasses.

The term ‘insularity’ – belonging to/being of an island – has been romanticised and associated with otherness both in the ancient and modern times<sup>[2](#f2)</sup>, leading to a stark distinction between islands and landmasses. Islands were first studied from an environmental perspective and were considered as ideal units of analysis due to their circumscribed local environments, finite resources and the uniqueness of their ecosystems. The early island studies drove the archaeological explorations of island societies, but they also carried a somewhat deterministic view of island life based on geographic boundaries and cultural relativism<sup>[3](#f3)</sup>.

The emphasis on geographic insularity as a relatively timeless portrayal of island life, however, takes away from a deeper engagement with the concept of island identity. The degree of openness as well as the intensity of connections within and between islands fluctuated over time depending on historical circumstances<sup>[4](#f4)</sup>. Insularity should therefore be understood as a dynamic concept dependent on specific socio-historical conditions rather than mere geography. Insularity is thus ultimately a form social identity – one’s sense of belonging to a group based on perceived social similarities and differences – and cultural strategy rather than a reflection of the islanders’ inability to connect with the people around them<sup>[5](#f5)</sup>.

Insularity, be it a physical or imagined concept, therefore, rests on a complex interplay between locality and connectivity. Yet inhabitants of the same island might not have shared the same type of identity; rather, island identities might have shifted depending on the inhabitants’ daily lives and experiences as well as connections within and beyond their immediate surroundings. For instance, intra-island fragmentation is well attested in Early Iron Age to Hellenistic Cyprus when its sociopolitical landscape was divided into seven city-kingdoms<sup>[6](#f6)</sup>. And while the inhabitants of each of these kingdoms could associate with a common, supralocal identity of the Cypriots, the Kyprioi<sup>[7](#f7)</sup>, this affiliation did not deny the existence of a more diverse range of identities. The Late Bronze Age nuragic societies of Sardinia were long considered as sharing a homogeneous cultural insular identity based on a set of common, island-wide features of practices and lifeways, focused on living in the vicinity of a nuraghe, an indigenous stone tower<sup>[8](#f8)</sup>. This identity, however, was a product of social choices and was a subject to definition and reconfiguration of the islanders’ conception of self and their interactions with their surroundings and others within it.

Even though islands’ symbolic boundaries could be maintained more easily as they coincided with firm physical boundaries of sea and land, at no point in antiquity were they coherent social or cultural entities with fixed borders. Just like on a mainland, there was much diversity within islands, with social, cultural, economic, and political networks often stretching beyond their limits. The extent of networks of interaction was dependent on the interplay between the different communities within an island – inhabiting diverse ecological niches from coastal areas to low lying or mountainous inland territories – with other islands and nearby landmasses. Islands were ultimately connected to their neighbours and hence did not present bounded or uniform spatial units but ranged in character<sup>[9](#f9)</sup>.

While islands and mainlands differ in many aspects, they are circumscribed by coast with more and less accessible shorelines. These coastal habitats were a common locus of activities such as travelling, meeting, and subsistence, shared by both islands and landmasses. From the coast, Mediterranean peoples could often spot other shores, and in fact all three large islands can be seen from the mainland<sup>[10](#f10)</sup>. This visual connectivity transcended geographical boundaries and may have played into a sense of association between coasts. Ports functioned as the more heterogeneous spaces, in which travellers and locals met, and the areas further away from the coast often relied on island-wide resources. Indeed, this sense of connectedness might have been stronger than within-island links between communities that practiced different lifestyles and inhabited different environments. Insularity as a phenomenon might have therefore been more pertinent to certain parts of an island rather than others, as ship to shore encounters might have had limited impact on the inland societies. The island of Crete with its striking mountains and deep gorges is a good example of the divergences between local pastoral lifestyle and the extra-island connectivity participated in and facilitated by coastal centres and fishing as well as sea-faring activities on the coast<sup>[11](#f11)</sup>.


The islands enclosed by the Mediterranean Sea thus comprise a diverse cultural environment characterised by an unusual degree of interconnectivity. Connectivity has been an important feature of island life as the sea can be a linking rather than just a dividing body, motivating and maintaining informal and formal connections. This has been increasingly evident in the study of the archaeology, art, and history of the Mediterranean islands from the antiquity to the present<sup>[12](#f12)</sup>, and a recognition of islands’ special position within the Mediterranean landscape gave rise to a branch of research, island archaeology<sup>[13](#f13)</sup>. Recent scholarship on the Mediterranean islands gives the primacy to human agency, characterised by both opportunities and restrictions, by emphasising a relational view of island-human interaction<sup>[14](#f14)</sup>. Being an Islander follows this current development in research and seeks to illustrate the manifold connections within and also between those who lived on islands.

The intensity of long and short distant connectivity waxed and waned through the Bronze and Iron Ages and increased significantly between the Archaic to the Roman periods. During the Middle Bronze Age, spatial proximity of the Aegean islands to one other, as well as the surrounding landmass, enabled intensive connections and Crete emerged as a consolidating power in the interlinked world. During the Late Bronze and Iron Ages, Cyprus resisted the incorporation into the neighbouring powerful land-based empires despite being located close to the southern Anatolian and the Levantine landmass; instead, islanders chose to align themselves more closely with the Greek cultural sphere<sup>[15](#f15)</sup>.

Sardinia was distant, relatively speaking, from the north African and south European mainlands, and through much of its history its inhabitants embraced insular identities despite being a part of significant trade networks with metal resources in the Late and Final Bronze Ages and despite providing a locus for Phoenician and Punic activities in the Iron Ages and Punic and Roman times<sup>[16](#f16)</sup>. From the Archaic period onward, Mediterranean islands more generally became increasingly integrated into long-distance networks propelled by the Phoenicians and the Greeks, for whom the sea presented a focal point of economic, political, and social opportunities<sup>[17](#f17)</sup>. The concomitant cultural convergence, however, enfolded against a backdrop of plurality. This is in no small part visible during the Roman period when many islands had to reposition themselves in terms of international visibility against the background of an increased control of the Mediterranean extended by a single centre, Rome. Cyprus, for example, has been thought of as backwaters due to the Roman dominion of the island and the shifting Mediterranean resource networks under the expanding empire, but recent reanalyses highlight its centrality in shaping provincial connections and its plurality in terms of increased consumption of ‘globalised’ Roman material culture in the port cities vis à vis more ‘insular’ expressions of local identities in the hinterland<sup>[18](#f18)</sup>.

The large islands were stepping stones of Mediterranean connectivity, as they provided assets needed to maintain infrastructure of movement and travel, such as anchorage points, agricultural land, manpower and resources. Yet propensity for Mediterranean connectivity was ultimately a social decision, resulting from willingness to participate in extra-island exchanges. While Cyprus and Crete have been portrayed as inherently connected islands, Sardinia’s history is often characterised as insular. New archaeological investigations increasingly show the strength of Sardinia’s connection with southern Italy and its participation in long distance trading networks<sup>[19](#f19)</sup>, which now provides a more balanced account of Sardinia’s cultural history.

## Footnotes
{: .text-info .lead }

<a name="f1">1</a>: Rackham and Moody 1996, xi; Constantakopoulou 2007, 12-15; Kopaka and Cadogan 2012, 18-19.  
<a name="f2">2</a>: For example, in Homer (e.g., Odyssey 5.60; 9.145-155; 10.1.5), Hesiod (Theognis 963-4), and Thucydides (I.143.4-5) (Constantakopoulou 2005, 2-3; 2007; Kopaka and Cadogan 2012, 19); for a comment on modern portrayal see Knapp 2007, 38-9.  
<a name="f3">3</a>: For a critique of such approaches see Patton 1996, van Dommelen 1999; Broodbank 2000; Knapp 2007; Ulf 2008; Cadogan, Iacovou, Kopaka, and Whitley 2012.  
<a name="f4">4</a>: Sahlins 1985; Knapp and Blake 2004; Knapp 2008; Broodbank 2013, 342.   
<a name="f5">5</a>: Broodbank 2000; Cherry 2004; Gordon 2018, 10.   
<a name="f6">6</a>: Iacovou 2013; Janes 2015.  
<a name="f7">7</a>: Various contributions in Georgiou 2012 and Pilides and Papadimitriou 2012.   
<a name="f8">8</a>: Blake 1999; 2015.  
<a name="f9">9</a>: Boomert and Bright 2007, 18.  
<a name="f10">10</a>: Broodbank 2000, fig. 4.  
<a name="f11">11</a>:  Kopaka and Cadogan 2012.    
<a name="f12">12</a>: For sea as a dividing body and islands as isolated see Braudel 1972; for sea as a connector see Horden and Purcell 2000; Broodbank 2013.  
<a name="f13">13</a>: Broodbank 2000; Bevan and Conolly 2013.  
<a name="f14">14</a>: Dawson 2014.  
<a name="f15">15</a>: Karageorghis 2013.    
<a name="f16">16</a>: Lo Schiavo 2003.
<a name="f17">17</a>: Constantakopoulou 2007, 2; Gordon and Kouremenos 2020,3.  
<a name="f18">18</a>: Gordon 2018.  
<a name="f19">19</a>: Sabatini and Lo Schiavo 2020.  

## Bibliography
{: .text-info .lead }

* Bevan, A., and J. Conolly. 2013. Mediterranean Islands, Fragile Communities and Persistent Landscapes: Antikythera in Long-Term Perspective. Cambridge University Press.
* Blake, E. 2015. “Late Bronze Age Sardinia: acephalous cohesion.” In The Cambridge Prehistory of the Bronze and Iron Age Mediterranean, edited by A. B. Knapp and P. van Dommelen, 96–108. Cambridge University Press.
* Blake, E. 1999. “Identity-mapping in the Sardinian Bronze Age.” European Journal of Archaeology 2(1): 35–55.
* Boomert, A., and A.J. Bright. 2007. “Island archaeology: in search of a new horizon.” Island Studies Journal 2(1): 3–26.
* Broodbank, C. 2000. An Island Archaeology of the Early Cyclades. Cambridge University Press.
* Broodbank, C. 2013. The Making of the Middle Sea: A History of the Mediterranean from the Beginning to the Emergence of the Classical World. Thames and Hudson.
* Cadogan, G., M. Iacovou, K. Kopaka, and J. Whitley, eds. 2012. Parallel Lives: Ancient Island Societies in Crete and Cyprus. Papers Arising from the Conference in Nicosia Organised by the British School at Athens, the University of Crete and the University of Cyprus, in November-December 2006. British School at Athens.
* Cherry, J.F.F. 2004. “Mediterranean island prehistory: what’s different and what’s new?” In Voyages of Discovery: The Archaeology of Islands, edited by S. M. Fitzpatrick, 233–248. Praeger.
* Constantakopoulou, C. 2007. The Dance of the Islands: Insularity, Networks, the Athenian Empire, and the Aegean World. Oxford University Press.
* Dawson, H. 2014. Mediterranean Voyages. The Archaeology of Island Colonisation and Abandonment. Left Coast Press.
* Georgiou, A., ed. 2012. Cyprus: An Island Culture. Society and Social Relations from the Bronze Age to the Venetian Period. Oxbow.
* Gordon, J.M. 2018. “Insularity and identity in Roman Cyprus: connectivity, complexity, and cultural change.” In Insularity and Identity in the Roman Mediterranean, edited by A. Kouremenos, 4–40. Oxbow.
* Kouremenos, A., and J.M. Gordon, eds. 2020. Mediterranean Archaeologies of Insularity in the Age of Globalization. Oxbow.
* Horden, P., and N. Purcell. 2000. The Corrupting Sea: A Study of Mediterranean History. Blackwell.
* Iacovou, M. 2013. “Historically elusive and internally fragile island polities: the intricacies of Cyprus’s political geography in the Iron Age.” Bulletin of the American School of Oriental Research 370: 15–47.
* Janes, S. 2015. “An entangled past: island interactions, mortuary practices and the negotiation of identities in Early Iron Age Cyprus.” In The Cambridge Prehistory of the Bronze and Iron Age Mediterranean, edited by P. van Dommelen and A. B. Knapp, 571–584. Cambridge University Press.
* Karageorghis, V. 2013. “Cyprus at the end of the Bronze [Age] again.” Pasiphae. Rivista di Filologia e Antichità Egee 7: 125–32.
* Knapp, A.B. 2007. “Insularity and island identity in the prehistoric Mediterranean.” In Mediterranean Crossroads. Selected Papers of the International Conference, Athens, 10-13th May 2005, edited by S. Antoniadou and A. Pace, 37–62. Athens: Pierides Foundation.
* Knapp, A.B. 2008. Prehistoric and Protohistoric Cyprus: Identity, Insularity, and Connectivity. Oxford University Press.
* Knapp, A.B., and E. Blake, eds. 2004. Prehistory in the Mediterranean: The Connecting and Corrupting Sea. Blackwell.
* Kopaka, K., and G. Cadogan. 2012. “Two Mediterranean island life modes, two island archaeologies. Crete and Cyprus: how near, how far?” In  Parallel Lives: Ancient Island Societies in Crete and Cyprus. Papers Arising from the Conference in Nicosia Organised by the British School at Athens, the University of Crete and the University of Cyprus, in November-December 2006, edited by G. Cadogan, M. Iacovou, K. Kopaka, and J. Whitley, 17–33. British School at Athens.
* Lo Schiavo, F. 2003. “Sardinia between east and west: interconnections in the Mediterranean.” In PLOES. Sea Routes. Interconnections in the Mediterranean 16th-6th c. BC. Proceedings of the International Symposium held at Rethymnon, Crete, September 29th-October 2nd 2002, edited by N. Chr. Stampolidis and V. Karageorghis, 15–34. The University of Crete and the A. G. Leventis Foundation.
* Patton, M. 1996. Islands in Time: Island Sociogeography and Mediterranean Prehistory. Routledge.
* Pilides, D., and N. Papadimitriou, eds. 2012. Ancient Cyprus. Cultures in Dialogue. Exhibition Catalogue. Department of Antiquities, Cyprus.
* Rackham, O., and J. Moody. 1996. The Making of the Cretan Landscape. Manchester University Press.
* Ulf, C. 2008. “Die Perspektive des Wasserraumes als soziales und kulturelles Konstrukt.” In Wasser und Raum. Beiträge zu einer Kulturtheorie des Wassers, edited by D. G. Eibl, L. Ortner, I. Schneider, and C. Ulf, 45–57. V&R Unipress.
* van Dommelen, P. 1999. “Islands in history.” Journal of Mediterranean Archaeology 12(2): 246–251.
* Sahlins, M. 1985. Islands of History. University of Chicago Press.
